ATLA: THE MANUAL

Lacking a wiki, I've endeavoured to include and instruction manual, for those who can't read CK2's code. This won't be completely exhaustive, solely because that would make this document enormous, but it should cover most everything you need to know. If you're still stuck, either consult the mod's code, or come ask in the Discord!
This manual is a work in progress, and will be updated as and when there's time and interest.

=== TABLE OF CONTENTS ==
01: THE AVATAR
 - 01a: Playing the Avatar
 - 01b: The AI Avatar
 - 01c: The Avatar Cycle
 - 01d: Team Avatar
 - 01e: Crisis Wars
 - 01f: Avatar Aang

== 01: THE AVATAR ==
The Avatar is a phenomenally powerful character, and therefore has a lot of bespoke mechanics. This will assume you're at least familiar with the Avatar cycle and what the Avatar does from the show 'Avatar: The Last Airbender'.

------------

01a: PLAYING THE AVATAR
CK2 is a game about playing a landed ruler. The game is built around this fact, and is at its strongest when that is being embraced. As such, you can only play the Avatar when they're landed - like Kyoshi is in all of her start dates, for example. An option is available should the player personally land the Avatar to swap over to them, similar to the option to swap to a successful Crusader King/Queen in the base game.

While playing the Avatar, the player will gain their bending traits automatically, following the cycle of elements, since the Avatar is assumed to always be training (though this may change in a future update). Once they have all their bending traits, they can gain the trait 'fully realised', representing complete mastery over the elements and their Avatar state. This new trait contains all the bonuses and uses of having each of the four bending traits.
The Avatar will learn the traits faster if they have courtiers who are at the highest tiers of bending for their element, and if they themselves are a more powerful bender. There's an element of randomness, but on average even a bender with the 'incompetent bending' trait - the lowest trait - and no teachers should fully realise in around 50 years, while the most competent of Avatars can be done in as few as 10. This might seem a long time if you're only familiar with 'The Last Airbender' and 'Legend of Korra', but remember that most Avatars take years and years to study bending - Avatars Aang and Korra were exceptions, not the rule.

As the Avatar, the player has the oppurtunity to interfere in several ways with the world. Always available are the ability to give your condemnation or endorsement to a ruler, giving them a malus or a buff depending. Other options are circumstantial - all of them require you to not have the 'Avatar Intereference Cooldown' modifier, which lasts for two years, but what else is available differs depending on what you want to do.
The Avatar can: help those being raided, attempt to end wars through diplomacy, be a guardian and ally to a young, powerful ruler, guard somebody from assassination or other plots, hunt down notorious murderers or tyrants, support or crush rebellions, squash heresy in realms afflicted with it (except Way of Chin, due to its central mechanic being opposition to the Avatar), assist the economy of an indebted realm, and - when they're fully realised - even free entire realms from slavery if they're a tributary to a pirate realm.

The Avatar also can't marry normally - surely they'd have a thousand suitors, but they exist outside of the usual political ties marriage can entail. The Avatar can only marry somebody that they love. While the player can do this via seduction or some wonders, to prevent needing to take that focus to dynasty build, you'll also be presented with the option to fall in love with somebody in your court once in a while. This event will fire more often the fewer members of Team Avatar you have in your court, if you're feeling a little stuck.
If your Avatar is homosexual, don't worry! Courtiers in the world of Avatar - and at the very least, the Avatar themselves - have access to gay marriage. Two loving spouses in a stable realm may even get an event to consider adoption - this will fire randomly, just like pregnancy in heterosexual couples, so make sure to make time for your family! The event also scales in frequency with fertility, so things like the Family Focus or 'Groom an Heir' ambition will still make it fire more frequently.

The player has the option to 'withdraw' from their Avatar duties any time they like. This will hide all their Avatar decisions, and disable some Avatar-specific events. However, carrying on this way for too long can have them be labelled a Bad Avatar - the world will stop wanting their help, and so they won't be able to interfere in the world ever again.

The player can also declare Crisis Wars - the mod's equivalent of Crusades. For more information on that, see 01e: Crisis Wars.

There should only ever be one Avatar at a time. Attempting to use the console or other unintended mechanics to become the Avatar may result in dire consequences!

----------

01b: The AI Avatar
When the Avatar is landed and controlled by the AI, they have functionally all the same powers and mechanics that player Avatars do, in keeping with CK2's design philosophy. Care has been taken to make them 'roleplay' a little - so an Avatar with a stewardship education and a kindly disposition is more likely to teach people and engage in the economic decision, while a wrathful Avatar with a military education is more inclined to go around knocking heads together and helping out with fighting.
When unlanded, however, Avatars work a little differently. While the AI can still do all the things it could while it was landed, most of them will now involve the Avatar actually physically travelling to a ruler's court to offer whatever assistance their offering. A landed Avatar may send a contingent of troops or a competent spymaster to help, while a landless Avatar will simply turn up in person to be a commander or spymaster themselves!
They'll also wander without reason, searching out masters of bending to study under. If you're hoping to get an Avatar to court, stacking your realm with master benders can seriously increase your chances.

The player can interact with the Avatar through many of the normal means - seduction, swaying, etc - but unlike normal courtiers or vassals, the Avatar has a great degree of autonomy. They cannot be invited to court, arranged to marry, or (safely) imprisoned or taken as a concubine. If the Avatar is in love with your character, you can offer to marry them with a special targeted decision - but the Avatar has to be the one to accept! If they're busy fighting a war, dealing with a global crisis, mastering their bending, or simply fully of wanderlust, they're unlikely to settle down to start a family.

The Avatar also can't be granted land normally. They must be offered a duchy-tier title and the lands within it that you hold - and they must agree to settle down. They're much more likely to agree if they've mastered their bending, have a high opinion of you, and have a special reason to want to be in *your* realm - like you being a former member of Team Avatar, being a friend/spouse/family member, etc.
This set up is usually permanent, but some Avatars will seek independence from tyrannical or evil characters, or simply wander off if they're so inclined. If they're a count or a baron, they'll do so no matter who replaces them, though an Avatar with a title of duke tier or higher will usually wait until they have an adult replacement waiting for them.

-----------

01c: The Avatar Cycle
Avatars, like everyone else, will die one day (except Kyoshi). When this happens, the Avatar is reincarnated as somebody new - though the world (and, indeed, the Avatar themselves) won't know until the sages tell them on their 16th birthday.

This means that when an Avatar dies, there's a 16-year long window where there is no Avatar. If you're part of a religion that's hostile to the Avatar, now might be the time to realise your ambitions! War can be waged, raiding can be undertaken, heresy can be embraced, and slavery enacted without fear of Avatar reprisal! Even once the Avatar comes of age, they might still not be powerful enough to stop you compared to a more competent, older one.

If the player was playing as the Avatar, they'll continue to play as their children, just like they would if they'd died as any other ruler. You can't play successive reincarnations of the Avatar - most of them would be unlanded, and you'd have to wait 16 years between each one. That doesn't seem very fun, or really viable within CK2.

Mechanically, what happens depends on your game rule. If it's set to 'canon avatars' (and there are still canon Avatars), then after a few years the character will show up where they should be. Roku will be in the fire court, Aang in the southern air temple, and Korra in the southern water tribe. Though you might not know they're the Avatar, you'll recognise their unique dynasty coat-of-arms and names.
If it's set to 'random', or if there's no more canon avatars to go, then there's a small - and I do mean SMALL, it's similar odds to being a Child of Destiny in the base game - of the Avatar being a character on the map who was born in the same year the Avatar died. It could even be someone in your dynasty!
But more often than not, the Avatar will be from among the peasantry, who make up a majority of the people in the world. Only on their 16th birthday will their name and face be known, and therefore will they be a character in the game, interacting with nobles and engaging in their Avatar business.

The Avatar always reincarnates in a set cycle of the elements: Water -> Earth -> Fire -> Air, then back to Water to start it all again. The Avatar will try to spawn in a county with the appopriate culture and religion for their element - if none can be found, they'll spawn somewhere multicultural, and finally if nowhere like that exists they'll spawn somewhere randomly.
Even starting in a date with no air nomads, if the cycle reaches 'air' again, the Avatar will still spawn in as an airbender. It will, however, take them a *very* long time to master their bending, as they're learning through trial and error, through consulting their past lives, and through whatever scrolls and writings they can find.

It is possible to break the cycle - if the Avatar is killed while in their Avatar State, then they will die forever rather than reincarnating. This is only achievable if facing the Avatar in one-on-one combat (every other method of killing them gives them either enough time to turn it off, or not enough awareness of their death to even enter it), and it's one of the hardest things to achieve in the entire game.
Killing the Avatar comes with a unique bloodline, with different effects depending on if you follow a faith that hates, likes, or reveres the Avatar. Ending the Cycle will, of course, permanently kill the Avatar forever, and all that entails.

Both the player and AI avatars may gain memories of their past life because of this. They can seek out familiar faces, rememeber old enemies with renewed fury, or even get lost in their own past. There's no way to activate these - they may just happen if you lucky (or unlucky, as the case might be!).

-------------

01d: Team Avatar
With all the Avatar sees and does, travelling alongside them is great for character building, and forming long-lasting friendships. To this end, when the Avatar is in a court, they might pick up followers - these people are marked with the 'Team Avatar' trait, and will follow the Avatar wherever they go. If the Avatar is landed, they're the Avatars trusted courtiers and assistants, helping them with their Avatar duties at court.

Members of Team Avatar must be unlanded to stay members of Team Avatar - if they ever gain land, or leave the Avatar's service for other reasons, they'll gain the trait 'former team avatar' instead.
It's possible to send one of your family members to join the Avatar on their adventures. Beyond gaining the trait itself, all sorts of things could happen to them: they could improve as a bender, change as a person, come back with gold, prestige or piety - or end up wounded, or worse. It's not always a safe life, being with the Avatar. Only one family member at a time can be on Team Avatar, but after a few years they'll usually come back.

Think of it like the Varangian Guard, from the base game.

------------

01e: Crisis Wars
Once a lifetime, the Avatar can declare a 'Crisis War', provided they've mastered the elements. The conditions for this are somewhat strict - owning a kingdom outside of their nation's traditional borders, being a large realm engaging in slavery, or being a powerful member of an Avatar-hostile religion. Even if a few duchies are seized outside of traditional borders, the Avatar won't be calling down a crisis war for that.

A Crisis War seeks to break the realm it's targeting - the realm will be shattered, with all its emperor and king tier titles being destroyed.
When the war is announced, it will be two years until it's actually declared, to give everyone time to prepare. When it does, every ruler who doesn't hate the Avatar will be offered the chance to join the War. If the Avatar is unlanded, one ruler will also be chosen as the 'host' realm, from where the war is being waged, acting as the war leader and having the Avatar in their court for the duration of the war.

It will only end when one side or the other surrenders. The fate of the world hangs in the balance!

------------

01f: Avatar Aang
Currently, there's no mechanic to 'find' Avatar Aang during the 100 years he's locked in ice. While he's in ice, however, the Avatar isn't dead - and so can't reincarnate. Start in any date during the 100 years war will functionally disable the Avatar. If Aang is a child or it's past the date he's freed from the ice, he'll act the same as any other Avatar (taking into account his traits, of course).
If any of this changes, this manual will be updated.